Page 2 
 
 
       UNIT -1 
 
Digital Computers 
 
Introduction 
Computer – The word “computer “comes from the word “compute “which means to calculate. 
So a computer is normally considered to be a calculating device that performs arithmetic 
operations at enormous speed. A computer is an electronic device which is used to perform 
operation on raw data as per instruction given by user. They are: 
 
1) It accepts data or instructions through input, 
2) It stores data, 
3) It can process required data by the user, 
4) It gives results as production, and 
5) It controls all functions inside the computer. 
 
1.Block diagram of digital computer and the functioning of its blocks 
Computer is an electronic device which performs tasks given by user with extremely fast speed 
and accuracy. Like any other device or machine, a computer system has also a number of parts. 
A computer system can be blocked into mainly three parts: 
 
1. 
Input Unit 
2. 
Central Processing Unit 
3. 
Output Unit 
 
 
1. Input unit – Input unit is a unit that accepts any input device. The input device 
is used to input data into the computer system. Function of input unit. 
 
1. It converts inputted data into binary codes. 
2. It sends data to main memory of computer . 
 
2. Central Processing Unit (CPU) – CPU is called the brain of a computer. An 
Page 2 
 
 
electronic circuitry that carries out the instruction given by a computer program. 
CPU can be sub classified into three parts. 
i. Control unit (CU). 
ii. Arithmetic & Logic unit (ALU).        
iii.Memory Unit (MU). 
i. Control unit (CU)- the control unit manages the various components of the 
computer. It reads instructions from memory and interpretation and changes in a 
series of signals to activate other parts of the computer. It controls and co-ordinate 
is input output memory and all other units. 
ii. Arithmetic & Logic unit (ALU) – The arithmetic logic unit (ALU), which 
performs simple arithmetic operation such as +,-, *, / and logical operation such as 
>, <, =<, <= etc. 
iii. Memory Unit (MU)- Memory is used to store data and instructions before and 
after processing. Memory is also called Primary memory or internal memory. It is 
used to store data temporary or permanently. 
Function of CPU: 
 
1. It controls all the parts and software and data flow of computer. 
2. It performs all operations. 
3. It accepts data from input device. 
4. It sends information to output device. 
5. Executing programs stored in memory. 
6. It stores data either temporarily or permanent basis. 
7. It performs arithmetical and logical operations. 
 
3. Output Unit –Output unit is a unit that constituents a number of output device. An 
output device is used to show the result of processing. 
Function of Output unit: 
 
1. It accepts data or information sends from main memory of computer 
2. It converts binary coded information into HLL or inputted languages. 
 
2.Definition of Computer organization & Architecture 
 
Computer Organization: Computer organization is concerned with the way the hardware 
components operate and the way they are connected together to form the computer system. 
The various components are assumed to be in place and the task is to investigate the 
organizational structure to verify that the computer parts operate as intended. 
 
Computer Design: Computer design is concerned with the hardware design of the computer. 
Once the computer specifications are formulated, it is the task of the designer to develop 
hardware for the system. Computer design is concerned with the determination of what hardware 
Page 2 
 
 
should be used and how the parts should be connected. This aspect of computer hardware is 
sometimes referred to as computer implementation. 
 
Computer Architecture: Computer architecture is concerned with the structure and behavior 
of the computer as seen by the user. It includes the information formats, the instruction set, and 
techniques for addressing memory. The architectural design of a computer system is concerned 
with the specifications of the various functional modules, such as processors and memories, 
and structuring them together into a computer system. 
 
Basic Computer Organization and Design 
1.Computer Registers 
 
The registers available in the computer are. 
Page 2 
 
 
 
2.Common Bus System 
 
The basic computer has eight registers, a memory unit, and a control unit. Paths must be provided to transfer 
information from one register to another and between memory and registers. The number of wires will be excessive if 
connections are made between the outputs of each register and the inputs of the other registers.A more efficient scheme 
for transferring information in a system with many registers is to use a common bus. The connection of the registers and 
memory of the basic computer to a common bus system is shown in Fig. below. The outputs of seven registers and 
memory are connected to the common bus. The specific output that is selected fo